---
layout: travel
title: Japan
departure: JFK
arrival: NRT
category: travel
takeaway: Significantly connected, and worlds apart
banner: https://lh4.googleusercontent.com/-93wLUKsjReA/UZr4CmX9qwI/AAAAAAAAToc/n2pTdoq5WR0/w538-h717-no/487CC234-147B-43A9-84E1-3A7F420CB1AE.JPG
---

ISTANBUL — Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey dismissed the tens of thousands of protesters who battled for two days with police officers in the streets of Istanbul as “looters” and “bums” on Sunday. He vowed to push ahead with plans to demolish a public park — a trigger for the spasm of public anger that left Istanbul’s main commercial district strewn with graffiti and broken glass.

“We will not yield to a few looters coming to that square and provoking our people, our nation, based on their misinformation,” Mr. Erdogan said in a speech carried live on television. He brushed aside the protesters’ accusations that he was becoming dictatorial, saying he was simply “a servant of the people.”

For much of Sunday, the mood at the protests in Taksim Square was one of celebration. Tens of thousands of demonstrators returned to the square claiming victory after the police withdrew on Saturday. The protesters erected improvised barricades of construction materials and burnt public buses on streets leading to the square, replacing the ones that city workers had cleared away the day before.

But later Sunday night, the police fired tear gas on protesters in Besiktas, a nearby neighborhood. Protesters also confronted the police and were met with tear gas in the capital, Ankara, and in Izmir on the Aegean coast, underscoring that the civil unrest directed at Mr. Erdogan has yet to run its course.

Mr. Erdogan said the protests were the work of the main opposition bloc, the Republican People’s Party, known by its Turkish initials C.H.P. He said the government would move ahead with controversial development projects, which would involve demolishing the park and constructing a mosque nearby, which secular Turks have opposed as another effort by Mr. Erdogan and his political party, Justice and Development, to expand the role of religion in Turkish society.

Though the demonstrations in Istanbul began in reaction to the plan to demolish the park, they soon grew into a broad reproach of Mr. Erdogan’s decade-long rule, which many Turks say has produced an overbearing government that dismisses the concerns of secular citizens. The protests followed the passing in Parliament of a controversial law restricting the sale and consumption of alcohol; on Saturday night, after reoccupying Taksim Square, many protesters broke out bottles of beer and chanted slogans calling for Mr. Erdogan to resign.

The calmer and more festive mood that prevailed in the square most of Sunday contrasted with the scene on Saturday, when some demonstrators destroyed police vehicles and bashed in the windows of bulldozers. There were music concerts, picnics, barbecues and poetry recitals on Sunday, and volunteers were promising free kofte — Turkish meatballs — for anyone who helped clean up the mess that was left in and around the park by Saturday’s clashes.

One of the volunteers was Ayse Duygu, 22, who supports Mr. Erdogan. “I’m not here for politics,” she said. “I just want to clean up my city, which these hooligans destroyed.”

The long-term political implications of the protests across the country are unclear. Analysts said that Mr. Erdogan’s grip on power was not in jeopardy; he can still count on strong support from religious conservatives, a large part of the electorate. But some analysts suggested that the protests might influence Mr. Erdogan’s leadership style, perhaps prompting him to pay more attention to the views of more secular Turks.

“Erdogan might have a majority of voters, but has to be the prime minister for us all,” said Ozgur Ulus, 40. “He cannot just say, ‘Yes, because I say so.’ He has to acknowledge me.” Mr. Ulus said he joined the protests after seeing “people being gassed like insects.”

Turkey’s interior minister, Muammer Guler, said on Sunday that protests were continuing in the cities of Eskisehir, Adana and Antalya as well as in Ankara. In all, he said, there had been protests in 67 cities and towns in recent days, and that the police had detained a total of 1,730 people. The semiofficial Anatolian News Agency reported that 115 security force members and 58 civilians had been injured.

In his remarks, Mr. Erdogan criticized Twitter, which became an important conduit of news — and unfounded rumors — about the demonstrations, which were not covered aggressively in the Turkish news media.

“Now we have a menace that is called Twitter,” he said. “The best examples of lies can be found there. To me, social media is the worst menace to society.”
